README.md, before:

# Volspy: Volumetric image visualization using vispy

[Volspy](http://github.com/informatics-isi-edu/volspy) is an
interactive volume visualization tool. Volspy is being developed to
support research involving 3D fluorescence microscopy imaging, but may
be applicable to other 3D images as well. Volspy is primarily used by
its authors as a framework for other projects such as
[Synspy](http://github.com/informatics-isi-edu/synspy), an interactive
synaptic visualization and classification tool.

## Screenshots

<img src="http://www.isi.edu/~karlcz/sample-data/volspy-shot1.png" />

<img src="http://www.isi.edu/~karlcz/sample-data/volspy-shot2.png" />

## Status

Volspy is experimental software that is subject to frequent changes in
direction depending on the needs of the authors and their scientific
collaborators.

## Using Volspy

Volspy has two usage scenarios:

1. A framework for volumetric data processing tools, where a basic
  interactive volume rendering capability can complement custom
  data-processing tools.
2. A standalone viewer application for quickly inspecting several
  common 3D image formats based on TIFF.

### Prerequisites

Volspy is developed primarily on Linux with Python 2.7 but also tested
on Mac OSX. It has several requirements:

- [Vispy](http://vispy.org) visualization library to access OpenGL GPUs.  A compatible development version is needed, such as [karlcz/vispy](https://github.com/karlcz/vispy) which is a clean branch of the upstream [vispy/vispy](https://github.com/vispy/vispy) master.
- [Numpy](http://www.numpy.org) numerical library to process
  N-dimensional data.
- [Tifffile](http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/code/tifffile.py.html) for access to OME-TIFF and LSM microscopy file formats as well as basic 3D TIFF files containing a stack of 2D pages.

### Installation

1. Check out the development code from GitHub.
2. Install with `python setup.py install`.

### Viewing an Image

1. Obtain a sample 1-4 channel 3D TIFF image such as:
   http://www.isi.edu/~karlcz/sample-data/zebra-d19-03b-D.ome.tiff
   **Warning: this is a large 886 MB file!**
  - A 1-channel image will be interpreted as gray.
  - A 2-channel image will be interpreted as red-green.
  - A 3-channel image will be interpreted as red-green-blue.
  - A 4-channel image will be interpreted as red-green-blue-alpha.
  - Any N-channel image with more than 4 will be interpreted one channel at a time (as gray) with a command to step to the next channel.
2. Launch the viewer `volspy-viewer zebra-d19-03b-D.ome.tiff`
3. Interact with the viewer
  - Press the `ESC` key when you have had enough.
  - Press the `?` key to get UI help printed to console output.
  - Click and drag volume with primary mouse button to rotate.
  - Click and drag volume with secondary mouse button to translate (pan).
  - Scroll the vertical scroll wheel to move a clipping or slicing plane up and down the viewing axis.
  - Press `SPACE` key to enter or exit slicing mode:
    - Entry to slicing mode repositions slice plane to intersect origin. Use shift modifier to retain current clip distance.
    - Entry to clipping mode repositions clip plane to near clipping distance. Use shift modifier to retain current slice distance.
  - Press number keys `1` to `9` to change intensity gain and with shift modifier to get reciprocal gain.
  - Press keys `f` and `F` to adjust the floor-level image intensity that is mapped to black.
  - Press `b` key to cycle through color blending modes:
    - Partial transparency
    - Additive blend
    - Maximum intensity projection
  - Press `c` key to cycle through channels on images with more than 4 channels.

Do not be alarmed by the copious diagnostic outputs streaming out on
the console. Did we mention this is experimental code?

### Environment Parameters

Several environment variables can be set to modify the behavior of the `volspy-viewer` tool on a run-by-run basis:

- `VIEW_ROTATE` specifies degrees of rotation for image about fixed X, Y, Z axis (default `0,0,0`).
- `VIEW_CHANNEL` specifies an integer channel number in range 0 to N-1 inclusive for N channel images, switching the viewer into single-channel mode and with the specified channel loaded initially. The `c` key can then be used to cycle through channels if desired. This mode is entered automatically for images with more than 4 channels.
- `VOXEL_SAMPLE` selects volume rendering texture sampling modes from `nearest` or `linear` (default for unspecified or unrecognized values).
- `ZYX_SLICE` selects a grid-aligned region of interest to view from the original image grid, e.g. `0:10,100:200,50:800` selects a region of interest where Z<10, 100<=Y<200, and 50<=X<800. (Default slice contains the whole image.)
- `ZYX_VIEW_GRID` changes the desired rendering grid spacing. Set a preferred ZYX micron spacing, e.g. `0.5,0.5,0.5` which the program will try to approximate using integer bin-averaging of source voxels but it will only reduce grid resolution and never increase it. NOTE: Y and X values should be equal to avoid artifacts with current renderer. (Default grid is 0.25, 0.25, 0.25 micron.)
- `ZYX_IMAGE_GRID` allows overriding of the actual image voxel size in case the image metadata is absent or wrong. The application also falls back to an assumed (1.0, 1.0, 1.0) micron grid if all else fails.
- `ZNOISE_PERCENTILE` enables a sensor noise estimation by calculating the Nth percentile value along the Z axis, e.g. `ZNOISE_PERCENTILE=5` estimates a 2D noise image as the 5th percentile value across the Z stack, and subtracts that noise image from every slice in the stack as a pre-filtering step. *WARNING*: use of this feature causes the entire image to be loaded into RAM, causing a significantly higher minimum RAM size for runs with large input images. (Default is no noise estimate.)
  - `ZNOISE_ZERO_LEVEL` controls a lower value clamp for the pre-filtered data when percentile filtering is enabled. (Default is `0`.)

The `ZYX_SLICE` and `ZYX_VIEW_GRID` parameters have different but inter-related effects on the scope of the volumetric visualization.

1. The `ZYX_VIEW_GRID` can control down-sampling of voxels in arbitrary integer ratios, e.g. to set a preferred grid resolution that can differentiate features of a given size without wasting additional storage space on irrelevant small-scale details. This can save overall RAM required to store the processed volume data by reducing the global image size. The down-sampling occurs incrementally as each sub-block is processed by the block-decomposed processing pipeline.
1. The `ZYX_SLICE` can arbitrarily discard voxels and thus reduce the final volume size, though discarded voxels may be temporarily present in RAM and require additional I/O bandwidth.

## Help and Contact

Please direct questions and comments to the [project issue
tracker](https://github.com/informatics-isi-edu/volspy/issues) at
GitHub.

## License

Volspy is made available as open source under the (new) BSD
License. Please see [LICENSE
file](https://github.com/informatics-isi-edu/volspy/blob/master/LICENSE)
for more information.

## About Us

Volspy is developed in the [Informatics
group](http://www.isi.edu/research_groups/informatics/home) at the
[USC Information Sciences Institute](http://www.isi.edu).  The
computer science researchers involved are:

* Karl Czajkowski
* Carl Kesselman

Commit message:

allow start or stop values to be omitted in ZYX_SLICE env param
For axis with length _L_:

- `:` is same as `0:L`
- `A:` is same as `A:L`
- `:B` is same as `0:B`

negative indexing is not allowed and empty slicing is not allowed.

README.md, after:

# Volspy: Volumetric image visualization using vispy

[Volspy](http://github.com/informatics-isi-edu/volspy) is an
interactive volume visualization tool. Volspy is being developed to
support research involving 3D fluorescence microscopy imaging, but may
be applicable to other 3D images as well. Volspy is primarily used by
its authors as a framework for other projects such as
[Synspy](http://github.com/informatics-isi-edu/synspy), an interactive
synaptic visualization and classification tool.

## Screenshots

<img src="http://www.isi.edu/~karlcz/sample-data/volspy-shot1.png" />

<img src="http://www.isi.edu/~karlcz/sample-data/volspy-shot2.png" />

## Status

Volspy is experimental software that is subject to frequent changes in
direction depending on the needs of the authors and their scientific
collaborators.

## Using Volspy

Volspy has two usage scenarios:

1. A framework for volumetric data processing tools, where a basic
  interactive volume rendering capability can complement custom
  data-processing tools.
2. A standalone viewer application for quickly inspecting several
  common 3D image formats based on TIFF.

### Prerequisites

Volspy is developed primarily on Linux with Python 2.7 but also tested
on Mac OSX. It has several requirements:

- [Vispy](http://vispy.org) visualization library to access OpenGL GPUs.  A compatible development version is needed, such as [karlcz/vispy](https://github.com/karlcz/vispy) which is a clean branch of the upstream [vispy/vispy](https://github.com/vispy/vispy) master.
- [Numpy](http://www.numpy.org) numerical library to process
  N-dimensional data.
- [Tifffile](http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/code/tifffile.py.html) for access to OME-TIFF and LSM microscopy file formats as well as basic 3D TIFF files containing a stack of 2D pages.

### Installation

1. Check out the development code from GitHub.
2. Install with `python setup.py install`.

### Viewing an Image

1. Obtain a sample 1-4 channel 3D TIFF image such as:
   http://www.isi.edu/~karlcz/sample-data/zebra-d19-03b-D.ome.tiff
   **Warning: this is a large 886 MB file!**
  - A 1-channel image will be interpreted as gray.
  - A 2-channel image will be interpreted as red-green.
  - A 3-channel image will be interpreted as red-green-blue.
  - A 4-channel image will be interpreted as red-green-blue-alpha.
  - Any N-channel image with more than 4 will be interpreted one channel at a time (as gray) with a command to step to the next channel.
2. Launch the viewer `volspy-viewer zebra-d19-03b-D.ome.tiff`
3. Interact with the viewer
  - Press the `ESC` key when you have had enough.
  - Press the `?` key to get UI help printed to console output.
  - Click and drag volume with primary mouse button to rotate.
  - Click and drag volume with secondary mouse button to translate (pan).
  - Scroll the vertical scroll wheel to move a clipping or slicing plane up and down the viewing axis.
  - Press `SPACE` key to enter or exit slicing mode:
    - Entry to slicing mode repositions slice plane to intersect origin. Use shift modifier to retain current clip distance.
    - Entry to clipping mode repositions clip plane to near clipping distance. Use shift modifier to retain current slice distance.
  - Press number keys `1` to `9` to change intensity gain and with shift modifier to get reciprocal gain.
  - Press keys `f` and `F` to adjust the floor-level image intensity that is mapped to black.
  - Press `b` key to cycle through color blending modes:
    - Partial transparency
    - Additive blend
    - Maximum intensity projection
  - Press `c` key to cycle through channels on images with more than 4 channels.

Do not be alarmed by the copious diagnostic outputs streaming out on
the console. Did we mention this is experimental code?

### Environment Parameters

Several environment variables can be set to modify the behavior of the `volspy-viewer` tool on a run-by-run basis:

- `VIEW_ROTATE` specifies degrees of rotation for image about fixed X, Y, Z axis (default `0,0,0`).
- `VIEW_CHANNEL` specifies an integer channel number in range 0 to N-1 inclusive for N channel images, switching the viewer into single-channel mode and with the specified channel loaded initially. The `c` key can then be used to cycle through channels if desired. This mode is entered automatically for images with more than 4 channels.
- `VOXEL_SAMPLE` selects volume rendering texture sampling modes from `nearest` or `linear` (default for unspecified or unrecognized values).
- `ZYX_SLICE` selects a grid-aligned region of interest to view from the original image grid, e.g. `0:10,100:200,50:800` selects a region of interest where Z<10, 100<=Y<200, and 50<=X<800. A start or stop value can be omitted to trim only the beginning or end of an axis, and both can be omitted to get the full axis, e.g. `5:`, `:1000`, `:`. (Default slice `:,:,:` contains the whole image.)
- `ZYX_VIEW_GRID` changes the desired rendering grid spacing. Set a preferred ZYX micron spacing, e.g. `0.5,0.5,0.5` which the program will try to approximate using integer bin-averaging of source voxels but it will only reduce grid resolution and never increase it. NOTE: Y and X values should be equal to avoid artifacts with current renderer. (Default grid is 0.25, 0.25, 0.25 micron.)
- `ZYX_IMAGE_GRID` allows overriding of the actual image voxel size in case the image metadata is absent or wrong. The application also falls back to an assumed (1.0, 1.0, 1.0) micron grid if all else fails.
- `ZNOISE_PERCENTILE` enables a sensor noise estimation by calculating the Nth percentile value along the Z axis, e.g. `ZNOISE_PERCENTILE=5` estimates a 2D noise image as the 5th percentile value across the Z stack, and subtracts that noise image from every slice in the stack as a pre-filtering step. *WARNING*: use of this feature causes the entire image to be loaded into RAM, causing a significantly higher minimum RAM size for runs with large input images. (Default is no noise estimate.)
  - `ZNOISE_ZERO_LEVEL` controls a lower value clamp for the pre-filtered data when percentile filtering is enabled. (Default is `0`.)

The `ZYX_SLICE` and `ZYX_VIEW_GRID` parameters have different but inter-related effects on the scope of the volumetric visualization.

1. The `ZYX_VIEW_GRID` can control down-sampling of voxels in arbitrary integer ratios, e.g. to set a preferred grid resolution that can differentiate features of a given size without wasting additional storage space on irrelevant small-scale details. This can save overall RAM required to store the processed volume data by reducing the global image size. The down-sampling occurs incrementally as each sub-block is processed by the block-decomposed processing pipeline.
1. The `ZYX_SLICE` can arbitrarily discard voxels and thus reduce the final volume size, though discarded voxels may be temporarily present in RAM and require additional I/O bandwidth.

## Help and Contact

Please direct questions and comments to the [project issue
tracker](https://github.com/informatics-isi-edu/volspy/issues) at
GitHub.

## License

Volspy is made available as open source under the (new) BSD
License. Please see [LICENSE
file](https://github.com/informatics-isi-edu/volspy/blob/master/LICENSE)
for more information.

## About Us

Volspy is developed in the [Informatics
group](http://www.isi.edu/research_groups/informatics/home) at the
[USC Information Sciences Institute](http://www.isi.edu).  The
computer science researchers involved are:

* Karl Czajkowski
* Carl Kesselman
